---
slug: pixels
title: "Designing information, part 2: A pixel is not a little square"
draft: true
tags: [science popularization]
---

This memo could be an information dump in a Christopher Nolan movie. Zero shame.

<!--truncate-->

import Image from "../src/components/Image";
import Iframe from "../src/components/Iframe";
import Small from "../src/components/Small";

<br />

<Image srcImage="img/illustrations/cube_companion.png" altText="cube-companion" />

<p style={{ textAlign: "center", fontWeight: "bold", marginTop: "20px", fontSize: "24px" }}>
  « A pixel is not a little square,
  <br />a pixel is not a little square,
  <br />a pixel is not a little square!
  <br />
  (And a voxel is not a little cube) »
</p>

<br />

This text is a synthesis, with some heavy modifications to make it simpler
for non-technical people, of a
[famous eponym technical memo](http://alvyray.com/Memos/CG/Microsoft/6_pixel.pdf)
written by Alvy Ray Smith in 1995 during his time at Microsoft. Alvy Ray
Smith is one of the co-founders of Pixar and a genius. I tried to keep the
original text where I could! Although it still lacks illustrations
according to me.

In a time where voxel (or the idea that some have of voxel I should say)
seems to be the next big thing for g@m3rz, I find interesting to dig out
this vision again. I wrote this during my internship time at Ubisoft, where voxels were seen as the next big thing in gaming by HQ.

<hr />

My purpose here is to, once and for all, rid the world of the
misconception that a pixel is a little geometric square. This is not a
religious issue. This is an issue that strikes right at the root of
correct image computing. The little square model is simply incorrect. It
harms. It gets in the way. If you find yourself thinking that a pixel is a
little square, please read this paper.

I will have succeeded if you at least understand that you are using the
model and why it is permissible in your case to do so (is it?).

Everything I say about little squares and pixels in the 2D case applies
equally well to little cubes and voxels in 3D. The generalization is
straightforward, so I won’t mention it from hereon.

## The Little Square Model

The little square model pretends to represent a pixel (picture element) as
a geometric square. Thus pixel (i, j) is assumed to correspond to the area
of the plane bounded by the square {(x, y) | i-.5 E x E i+.5, j-.5 E y E j+.5}.

I have already, with this simple definition, entered the territory of
controversy—a misguided (or at least irrelevant) controversy as I will
attempt to show. There is typically an argument about whether the pixel
“center” lies on the integers or the half-integers. The “half-integerists”
would have pixel (i, j) correspond instead to the area of the plane {(x,
y) | i £ x £ i+1., j £ y £ j+1.}.

See the little squares? Pixels would have edges and centers by this
formulation.

## So, What Is a Pixel?

A pixel is a point sample. It exists only at a point. For a color picture,
a pixel might actually contain three samples, one for each primary color
contributing to the picture at the sampling point. We can still think of
this as a point sample of a color. But we cannot think of a pixel as a
square—or anything other than a point.

There is a famous theorem called the Sampling Theorem, which tells us that
we can reconstruct a continuous entity from a discrete entity using an
appropriate reconstruction filter. That allows us to represent an image as
a rectilinear array of point samples (pixels!).

There are many types of reconstruction filter out there, and the point of
this memo is not to detail all of them, or to explain the maths behind
them but to show you the basics.

Let’s take a picture:

<img class="illustration" src="/illustrations/voxel (1).png" />

Our picture has here 5x4 pixels, which contain color information. To fill
the blanks, we will use a reconstruction filter, which can be modelled
with its footprint:

<img class="illustration" src="/illustrations/voxel (2).png" />

What this shows is that this filter will consider 5 pixels around a pixel
center to build color inside its footprint (this is a huge simplification
but it’s the general idea). So, when you apply a filter to each pixel, you
get something like this:

<img class="illustration" src="/illustrations/voxel (3).png" />

So, the final image will “look” like this:

<img class="illustration" src="/illustrations/voxel (4).png" />

If we change our reconstruction filter, for a “bigger” one, one that will
consider more pixel information to build its color, such as this one:

<img class="illustration" src="/illustrations/voxel (5).png" />
Then the final image will “look” like this:

<img class="illustration" src="/illustrations/voxel (6).png" />

You normally _feel_ that it’s a better reconstruction: there is a
lot more overlap between each filter footprint, it will be more precise,
just because knowledge sharing is better (image scientists could murder
for that, but it’s the general idea).

Now let’s look at the worst case: a box filter. Which looks like our
little square model right?

<img class="illustration" src="/illustrations/voxel (7).png" />
Then our image is reconstructed like this:

<img class="illustration" src="/illustrations/voxel (8).png" />

It is a valid reconstruction, but very poor in quality compared to the
other filters, resulting in “jaggies” and general “aliasing”.

## Why Is the Little square Model So Persistent?

I believe there are two principal reasons that the little square model
hasn’t simply gone away:

- Geometry-based computer graphics uses it
- Video magnification of computer displays appears to show it

Geometry-based computer graphics (3D synthesis, CGI, etc.) has solved some
very difficult problems over the last four decades by assuming that the
world they model could be divided into little squares. Rendering is the
process of converting abstract geometry into viewable pixels that can be
displayed on a computer screen or written to film or video for display.

A modern computer graphics model can have millions of polygons
contributing to a single image. How are all these millions of geometric
things to be resolved into a regular array of pixels for display? Answer:

- Simplify the problem by assuming the rectangular viewport on the model
  is divided regularly into little squares, one per final pixel.

- Solve the often-intense hidden surface problem presented by this little
  square part of the viewport.

- Average the results into a color sample.

This is, of course, exactly box filtering. And it works, even though it is
low order filtering.

We probably wouldn’t be where we are today in computer graphics without
this simplifying assumption. But, this is no reason to identify the model
of geometric contributions to a pixel with the pixel. I often meet
extremely intelligent and accomplished geometry-based computer graphicists
who have leapt to the identification of the little square simplification
with the pixel. This is not a plea for them to desist from use of the
little square model. It is a plea for them to be aware of the
simplification involved and to understand that the other half of computer
picturing—the half that uses no geometry at all, the imaging half—tries to
avoid this very simplification for quality reasons.

When one “magnifies” or “zooms in on” an image in most popular
applications, each pixel appears to be a little square. The higher the
magnification or the closer in the zoom, the bigger the little squares
get.

Since I am apparently magnifying the pixel, it must be a little square,
right? No, this is a false perception.

What is happening when you zoom in is this: Each point sample is being
replicated MxM times, for magnification factor M. When you look at an
image consisting of MxM pixels all of the same color, guess what you see:
A square of that solid color!

It is not an accurate picture of the pixel below. It is a bunch of pixels
approximating what you would see if a reconstruction with a box filter
were performed.

To do a true zoom requires a resampling operation and is much slower than
a video card can comfortably support in realtime today. So, the plea here
is to please disregard the squareness of zoomed in “pixels”. You are
really seeing an MxM array of point samples, not a single point sample
rendered large.

But wait a minute: my monitor is made of pixels, right?

Well. Many people are aware that a color monitor often has little triads
of dots that cause the perception of color at normal viewing distances.
There is no fixed mapping between triads and pixels driving them. The
easiest way to understand this is to consider your own graphics card.

Most modern cards support a variety of different color resolutions—eg,
640x480, 800x600, 1024x768, etc. The number of triads on your display
screen do not change as you change the number of pixels driving them.

## Summary

I have presented a brief but inclusive analysis of sampling and filtering.
It has been shown that the little square model does not arise naturally in
sampling theory, the main underpinning of everything we do. The geometry
world uses it a great deal because they have had to simplify in order to
accomplish. Their simplified model of contributions to a pixel should not
be confused with or identified with the pixel. Magnified screen pixels
that look like little squares have been shown to be a quick and dirty
trick (pixel replication) by graphics boards designers, but not the truth.

In short, the little square model should be suspect whenever it is
encountered. It should be used with great care, if at all, and certainly
not offered to the world as “standard” in image computing.

## Conclusion: A Voxel is _not_ a little cube!

This part is me (JB Siraudin) writing.

You may have found the previous part a little obscure. After all,
simplifying a pixel to a little square didn’t hurt _that_ much the
computer graphics industry or the video game industry. Many sampling or
anti-aliasing strategies made up for that.

Now let’s take voxels.

Voxels are not cubes. Voxels are points on 3D grid. It is
_simple_ to represent them like cubes but they can be in any shape.
If I don’t think the little square model is dangerous anymore, cubic
voxels shouldn’t be the norm. Our mental shape of a voxel is determined by
voxelart and Minecraft whereas we should turn to fluid simulation as an
example of good use of voxels.

If we think of voxels as 3d points for sampling methods, they can be
applied on top of practically any 3D representation technique, like
polygon meshes. In fact, it’s already used in advanced lighting
algorithms. Just as pixels, one could imagine reconstruction filters for
remeshing voxellised shapes.

The vision of voxels at Ubisoft is to consider them as atoms to run large
and “accurate” physics simulations to create more believable worlds and
better sandboxes. I’m not saying voxels is a bad idea to accomplish this
vision. I’m saying we can do it without seeing cubes everywhere. And also,
not all physics simulations are made to run with an “atomic” model.

One must think of voxels as a shape for data storage and data
manipulation, not as a 3D shape. And this is all what matters for future
world building and simulation: data transformation. Voxels could be a
strong basis for this, or not.

The real future of video game for Ubisoft is not _voxels_ per se, it’s _data-oriented design_. Where data is
the basis of the engine, where multiple simulations can run on the same
set of data so you don’t need to manually create links between systems. I
believe more in _this_ as the key to create complex intricate systems, not
to modelize everything in the world as little cubes.

## Making a game out of reconstruction filters

Detective game = gathering information, recreating the whole picture by defining groups of samples
information is scattered based on how it is scattered on the set
