---
slug: conlangs
title: Identifying approaches to constructed languages
draft: true
hide_table_of_contents: false
tags: [design, languages]
---

Ufotable is killing it, with simple but sharp tools.

<!--truncate-->


[29/09/2023 06:55] Jean-Baptiste Siraudin
    I looked up the same topic for a pet project. Useful resources may come from https://conlang.org/resources/ (conlang is short for constructed languages which is prefered to fictive languages). The Reddit is also very active and super fun to go through: https://www.reddit.com/r/conlangs/


And if I can add my own take, here are the different approaches I identified, with a relatively low cost, in order of complexity, assuming we’re only talking about written languages :

Gibberish : … well Outer wilds just use a pretty looping texture with different spiral patterns for the nomai language.
 
New 1-to-1 alphabet : this is what Star Wars does with Aurebesh, which is just English with a new alphabet. Star Wars world building is not especially deep and they are more interested in looking alien than being alien. It doesn’t have to adapt Latin alphabet necessarily obviously.

Syllabary : this is what Tunic or Zelda does, English (or Japanese) but consonant/vowels instead of letters. Consonant and vowels can be combined in the same rune to form a phoneme. This is what I prefer as you can still get very creative but with hard constraints (you're not creating syntax or grammar, just phonemes).
 
Logograms : Written symbols representing words instead of sounds like in Chinese. Chants of Sennar does this, with simplified grammar so no conjugation of verbs, basic pronouns (you, me), and sometimes a « plural » symbol but not for all languages in the game. A lot of thought went to designing the symbols though, with a lot of patterns acting as clues to guess the word behind the symbol (verbs always have a specific line, noun and associated verb have the same drawing in common, etc). This approach is scalable in complexity : the logograms in Arrival are just 100 words but with a lot more going on pattern-wise (the thickness of the line can provide additional meaning, etc).
 
Full blown language… from other languages : that’s how a lot of conlang are born, take a part of this, the syntax from that, the grammar rules from whatever, mash it up. I imagine it could work quickly especially if you simplify key areas like grammar and if you’re not too perfectionist. The biggest task then would be to create the dictionary.

It all really depends on what the conlang is here for, the time/budget, how many people should use it, … the most reasonable approach in a video game production seems to create a new visual for the language of the team (alphabet or syllabary). Also ... don't forget the numbers ! (Myst has D'ni numeration which is awesome).


